---
title: 'What is version control, and why should I use it?'
description: "The basics on version control and why its needed in modern projects."
---

Before you embark on the world of version control, its best if you understand
what actually _is_, why this exists, and what can help you with on your files
and projects. Here we describe a brief store in version control for projects,
and a series of examples that show you how version control can be useful to you.

## A brief history of version control in software and beyond

We have always lived in a world where the need to collaborate within a team on a
project. As you might expect, working on teams on a single project can be
complicated. It can be tricky to manage, since each team member will be on an
individual machine, and can take up a lot if time (time of which you'd want to
be actually developing your project, not managing all the conflicts, and keeping
every team member updated with the latest version of the project).

Managing digital projects is a common occurrence, and many solutions have been
created to solve this problem. Around the 1960s, the solution was without
software. The idea was to, literally, go to the "Source Control Department",
where they would pick up your changes, carefully watch was updated from every
employee, and solve conflicts with other employees. They would then gather a new
version of the software and distribute it for everyone the next day. They would
also keep a history of the project in case someone needed to go back to a
specific day of changes.

We have improved much since then though, we now have the Internet, which helps
us to do this automated distribution automatically, and we have created tools
that automate and streamline this process for us (for which Diversion is one of
these).

The necessities of users have dramatically changed. Originally, it was called
source control, because it only involved programmer's code (which are mostly
plain text files). But nowadays, other people like artists and musicians need to
use these kinds of tools, and many users also need to deal with files that are
not just text. Images, audio, other specialized format are also part of complex
projects, and this cannot be ignored in enormous project, like video games or
any kind of interactive projects.

It's because of this that the term "version control" nowadays is a more accepted
term, to encompass all the current needs that need to be met by the users.

### So... what is version control then?

_In a nutshell, version control is the practice of organizing, storing, and
administrating your project changes of a given digital project. This is usually
done within a team of developers, but its is also acceptable (and welcome) to do
this in a solo project. This practice has evolved to be supported by specialized
tools that help you manage file changes, history and conflicts with other team
members._


## Examples of problems that version control can help you with

It is normal to ask why and how version control can help you. There can be some
examples. We can list at the very least three important things for which version
control can help you with:

### Keep a backup of your files

Most of us have experienced a problem in our computers that threaten your files.
A blackout, a power surge, malware or something similar can happen to your
computer and compromise your data integrity. This can spell disaster for entire
teams, especially when you are in a big project with a tight deadline. Version
control can fulfill this problem and keep your files safely stored in a separate
computer and, if something happens to your local machine, you can be safe on
knowing a version your files are stored somewhere, and you can recover with
minimal damage (maybe losing only the files for that specific day, when disaster
struck).

Some people use cloud services as a solution. Typical examples of clouds
services are Dropbox or OneDrive or Microsoft Sharepoint. Others do regular
backups on external drives. And although both of these solutions are fine (and
we do recommend to back up your files regularly!), there is another advantage
for version control that normal backups cannot do.

### Keep a history of your files

You may have been in this situation: 

Suppose you are making a presentation for someone and are working on a typical
presentation program. You decide that you are happy with the current version you
have and decide to make an experiment, trying to bring the slides in a new
direction. After a couple of hours, you feel disappointed in the attempt and
want to go back to the previous idea you had. 

If you did not save an alternate file saved before this attempt, you have lost
the original version, and you now have to manually retrace the steps (and Ctrl+z
can only do so much sometimes). This is a mild example, but there are nightmare
scenarios: 

Your computer can have a problem, and you did not back up the many versions and
attempts you made on the last week, and you have lost a bunch of work. Or even
worse, you may have a power surge and your file then becomes corrupted and
impossible to open again, losing your actual work without possibility of having
ti back. 

Many users, especially artists and creative types have long learned this lesson
and are used to keep lots of versions of a single file and save regularly. Other
applications even have automated save periods and keep several versions of the
same file to have an escape hatch if the program fails.

Version control helps you here by not only saving your file, but also keeping a
history of the changes you make. Every time you _commit_ a file to the version
control system. It will mark that version as the most recent, but also keep a
numbered history if all your changes. This happens for every group of file you
commit to the server, and detects all state changes (that is, moving, deleting,
creating, etc.) This means that you can keep any version of your work and be
able to recover and check on previous versions if needed.

Sometimes keeping a file history is not enough. There is a very common problem
that can occur when you are working with a teammate.

### Be able to warn and solve conflicts in your files.

This is another issue that can happen with teammates:

Imagine you are working with a teammate on an offline text document. You and
your friend tend to work in the same file, but you have to be very careful that
you don't end up working on the same file, and overwrite it by accident in your
shared cloud space. 

But sometimes it will just happen, both of you will work on the same file. And
you will have to both talk and try to deal what changes they made and what
changes you made, and try to deal with a unified image that "merges" both of
your contributions. And you will have to be very careful on overwriting the
file, as you don't want to unwittingly delete the work your colleague did.

In version control, this is called a conflict, and current version control tools
have automated ways o deal about this. For plain text files, there are way to
deal with merges automatically, and will show you a specialized window that deal
with conflicting merges so you can choose what goes in and what goes out in the
final file.

For binary files (like images, audio, 3d models, etc.), this is more difficult
to handle for computers, but some systems do offer you warnings and safeguards
to avoid working on files that somebody else is working on. It's still an
unsolved problem for these types of files, but the safeguards will definitely
help you to deal with these kinds of problems. And it definitely beats tracking
all of this by hand.


### Avoiding storing unnecessary files

Modern digital and software projects usually tend to create a lot of temporary
files that are only needed at a very specific point in time to 

In a normal cloud storage system, you cannot filter out these files, which will
not only create unnecessary bloat in your project, but it can generate serious
problems when collaborating with others, since these files tend to be unique and
exclusive for each collaborator and overwriting these fills will cause problems
when exporting or finalizing a project in the long run.

Version control systems have a specialized system designed to exclusively filter
these kinds of files and folders, giving you a clean and functional repository
for you and every teammate in your projects.

Now, there is a final advantage of using version control that is often
overlooked by some, but when it happens, you wish you had known before.

### Branching and merging

Sometimes, you find yourself on a project that needs a serious change in some
areas. A process that will involve modifying a lot of files and a whole
restructure of the project. But doing this can be a hindrance to your team, and
you don't want to slow the down.

You can also be experimenting a new feature, but you are not sure if this new
feature will be worth it, and it could be very disrupting for your team if you
do this on the project itself. So what can you do?

The usual naive solution would be to copy the entire project on a separate place
and start the changes. If you fail or want to backtrack. Then its easy, you
delete your project copy and that's it. But if the feature or the rework is
complete, you now need to do the painful process of merging that copy back to
the original work of others. It can be complicated and dangerous if done wrong,
especially when your team has already put their own work since you copied the
original project.

Version control systems have created an automated way to solve this, called
branching. You can have a digital copy of a specific version of your project and
create a new copy of it (a branch) from the main base. You then can work
separately (or with teammates assigned to this task). The branch copies are
smart and usually only contains changes, so you are not duplicating the entire
project. But also it can keep its own history, and can get the benefit of
merging. When you finish your tasks, you can then "merge" back to the main
project, and the system will sue its merging tool set to keep everything tidy
and up to date with your teammates work, and help you deal with conflicts.

We will explain later how branching works more specifically, but for now,
understand that this is one of the more powerful feature of any version control
system.


## Conclusion

Whether you'll start a project solo, or are you going to work with a team,
version control will become an important part of your tool set to bring projects
to fruition successfully. Version control is not only to keep a faithful backup
of the state of a project, but also to solve conflicts, detect who, when and why
a person made changes to the project, keep a history of the evolution of the
project, and being able to revert to previous version of files if the need
arises.

Version control systems have been created to help you optimize processes to
develop your project and offer a centralized finalized state of the whole
project at a given time.

Diversion is one of such systems, with features designed specifically for users
that need something that "just works", and want something that works "out of the
box" without and complex setup procedures or complicated and confusing commands.
But also for feature that power users will appreciate when doing heavy-duty
work.

