---
title: Differences between similar version control systems
description: "Comparison between similar systems"
---

Diversion is not the only version control system out there. But its is also not
the only way to keep and track files on the internet. Here we do a small
comparison between other systems to understand why diversion is different from
other systems.

## Basic cloud storage (Dropbox, One Drive, etc.)

Cloud storage systems are probably the most commonly used system to keep copies
of files right now. These are simple to use, these are just simple storage
services where you can save any important files or data, not unlike using an
external storage system on your local computer.

Although this is the simplest way to save and keep backups of your files, they
are not very good to work on complex projects. They don't have any file history
capabilities (or if they have it, its very limited), and keeping track of file
changes and working with others can be complicated even with a small amount of
files and collaborators. A file can be updated or deleted without your
knowledge, and it can be very hard to reason why or who made a change in the
project.

And finally, usually large projects have lots of intermediary files that every
user will locally generate. This means that every collaborator who tries to work
on your project will generate their own temporary files. You can have serious
problems when you keep overwriting these files, since they are useful only to
the user that generated them at the time.

## Version control systems

Now its is very uncommon for projects to use simple storage systems on their
projects. It is more common to actually have a specialized system to work with
others.

But even for version control systems there are different types of these,
handling different philosophical models and technical features.

### Centralized systems (SVN, Plastic SCM, Perforce, etc.)

Centralized version control systems have a central server that holds all the
repository information. A repository is your project's container; it hosts all
the assets, but also all the branches and commit history of every collaborator. 

Multiple collaborators work on the same repository, contributing new assets or
modifying existing ones by uploading.

These were the first types of systems created and still used very widely.

### Distributed systems (Git, Mercurial, etc.)

Distributed systems are newer, relatively speaking and have a different way of
behaving.

### Other Version control features

#### Branching

Branching is a way for users to have separate copies of a repository state to
work separately in a specific feature or experimenting with a new idea without
having to disrupt the main collaborators work. Branches keep its own commit
history, and can be deleted or merged with other branches.

Most modern version control systems have some support of branch creation, merge
and deletion.


#### Binary file management

Historically, because of their origins from software development, version
control system only deal with text files. Binary files are different and can be
very difficult to manage if the system is not designed to handle these. Treating
binary files as text can be dangerous, since they can in fact corrupt the file,
thinking of it as a simple plain text file.

Most modern version control systems should have a basic understanding of binary
files and ways to deal with them accordingly.

#### Large files management

There are similar problems with large files. By large files we are talking about
files starting from a couple of hundred megabytes, up to hundreds of gigabytes.

For the same reason explained before, old source control systems are not used to
handle large files, less so large binary files, since they only focused on small
text files.

This is one of the main problem of current modern version control systems, and
many old systems have ad-hoc solutions to these, with many warts and issues that
come along with it. You can actually note a different between version control
system in the way they handle large binary files, and in recent times new
version control systems have been created specifically to handle projects that
need to deal with these kinds of files (like Diversion!).

#### Self-hosted or cloud managed

Some advanced users want to have full control a repository system and usually
want to install the system on a personal or company owned server. This feature
is called self-hosting. 

Some systems offer a way to do this, others don't. The main advantage for expert
users is gaining full control and isolation from the system on trusted sources.
But it comes with a need to know how to use it and deal with any problems on
your own if something happens.

Cloud managed systems are handled by other users, usually the creator of the
system or third party companies, that help you deal with this, taking the server
and data problems from you, so you can only concentrate on developing your
projects.

#### Pull or merge request

Projects that are specially collaborative (such as open source projects) usually
expect collaborators from anywhere. The nature of open source makes that some
people come and go contributing on open source projects and there are not many
permanent contributors. For these types of projects, it's important for the main
members to keep a way to receive and approve or deny requests.

This feature is called a pull or merge request, and it's basically a commit, or
series of commits somebody create in a separate branch, and its asks the main
members of the project to merge their changes with a description and
justification on the change and why the collaborator wants to merge this.

Usually mono-repo projects are not designed for collaboration with strangers on
the internet, and their collaborators and contributions to the main project are
well known since they tend to be permanent members for the whole duration (or at
least a huge part) of the project. Such style of repository management usually
does not need feature like pull requests

## So what is Diversion?

Well, according to these definitions, Diversion is:

* A centralized version control system
* Supports branching
* Support for binary and large files
* Cloud managed
* Designed for mono-repo style repositories

Diversion was designed for holding large project with many and very big binary
files, and for work with multiple collaborators.

Diversion does not have a pull or merge request system, but it has a way to check the
results of a merge via a merge preview command,

